to some extent every philosophical
discussion is shaped but your approach
to the philosophy of language many
meanings arise in a given language
through the contrast of words and
meanings that are presupposed at the
start of the discussion so I'm going to
draw attention to some of the
presuppositions within the discourse on
free will and determination in
determinism pardon me
with the following algorithm having
choice free will making decisions for
oneself is illustrated by contrasting a
puppeteer and a puppet so there's a man
holding a puppet with his hand or a man
holding the strings that hold up a
puppet and if the puppet is
sophisticated enough if the performance
is elaborate enough it may appear that
the puppet is alive that the puppet is
thinking that the puppet has emotional
expressions and reactions and original
thoughts and makes decisions but you
maybe have to explain to a small child
no no no the puppet has no free will the
puppet doesn't decide anything the
puppet doesn't think anything the
puppets actions are merely cause and
effect in relation to this puppet master
the puppeteer explaining this to a child
is implicitly relying on a contrast it
this is not merely the abstract idea of
cause and effect that there is a
contrast between the type of decision
the type of mentation the type of
thinking that the puppeteer engages in
in the type of action the type of
reaction in the movements of the puppet
right so I think it is very beguiling
for many people that many people in my
audience apparently many people watched
my videos to imagine that just the
abstract category of cause and effect
solves this problem and no further
explanation no further problems all we
needs to be occasion to simply say no no
both the actions of the puppet and the
puppeteer both the actions of the
and of the the puppet that resembles
meant both of these things equally are
subject to cause and effect and I think
this is a signing explanatory power to
one mere abstract concept cause and
effect which is like gravity you say oh
well of course we don't have free will
there's gravity this to me is actually
quite spurious to the question whereas
the contrast being made between a
puppeteer and a puppet is actually
something meaningful so I feel like a
lot of this discourse relies on of
office feeding and evading very real and
meaningful contrasts so muhammad' here
is a skeptic I guess about both free
will and determinism I don't think you
easily accept either Prem well I'll find
out in a second but I noticed that when
I talk to people about this concept when
I am assailing the assumptions of people
who dogmatically believe in determinism
people who really believe there is no
difference between the puppet and the
puppeteer neither ethically nor
cognitively nor otherwise that is all
just the chain of cause and effect when
I asked them about dreaming they have
nothing to say one of the differences
between a puppet and a real person is
dreaming one of the differences between
a person and a computer program computer
programs in many ways are like puppets
if the computer program is elaborate
enough if it's sophisticated enough it
can resemble a real person it can seem
like it's talking to us and making
decisions and carrying of physical
actions computers and robots one of the
differences is that a computer does not
have creative original ideas about the
future in the way that a human being
does and what I've talked to people who
believe in determinism even these types
of very simple illustrations that
ultimately realize filtrations of an
implicit difference between the
puppeteer and the puppet they can't deal
with thing they actually just get angry
and yell at me I've talked about this
with them they become frustrated and
just try to insist that no no no a
puppet really is the same as a person a
computer program really is the same as a
human mind despite very
or hard criteria that established them
that distinguished the sphere of people
making choices that they were countable
for ultimately eagle in legally and
ethically and objects moving maybe
mimicking wheel choices and decisions as
part of this so-called chain of cause
and effect hmm well I guess the reason
why I'm not very satisfied with this
line of reasoning is because it relies
on an instinctive sense and perception
of the difference between us and robots
or machines or artificial intelligence
and I want something like a lot more
vivid and and philosophical right and
then and a lot more clear isn't that
like an argument that has clear like
objective premise that doesn't delight
just an our subjective perception okay
the distinction of our mode of being and
right I think that's a good objection to
someone else but not to my argument so
what are you say I give you two criteria
already dreaming and asserting at ideas
about the future right ideas created
exnihilo right really scientifically
it's not subjective we can prove whether
or not cat's dream we can prove whether
or not dogs dream we can prove whether
or not sharks dream right various types
of animals and mammals okay so you know
scientifically it's an objective fact
whether or not something engages in
dreaming right now I think you would
also concede the point scientifically we
can determine that my computer when I
put it to sleep
it is not dreaming there's nothing in
the computer or when it's off or a
Seabright so I just say I think your
objection it might be good for someone
else's approach to this but I've already
given you two very hard criteria so my
really um what I would say with the
future I would phrase in terms of the
radical imagination and having access to
the form of the future it's not who were
saying why I'm using this kind of word
it's but it's difficult to say when
we're talking about imagining the future
that I'm not
talking about a reaction to cause and
effect very often the selection of
examples by determinist they'll say oh
well you see a beautiful woman across
the street and then you react to this
beautiful woman
we'll wait I'm capable of sitting in an
empty room and imagining a beautiful
woman I've never met and there are
people who in their whole lives they
never met a black person but they sit
and imagine and fantasize about a
romance with a black person they choose
to imagine things for the future and
then they buy an airplane ticket to
Africa you know things happen you know
they act on this dream okay so having
the capacity for radical imagination the
form in the form of the future producing
new plans than phone of this length
these are criteria we can test right and
which is was a not all animals will have
this I mean presumably some mammals have
such limited cognitive abilities I don't
know if there were any mammals that do
not dream but I am I'm willing to accept
that a noise er an oyster has no brain I
mean some animals must be so simple that
they don't dream and they don't think
about the future and planning for the
future I would be willing to accept that
but my point is with humans and with
many other ant animals whether they're
monkeys or dolphins these are hard
criteria that establish the capacity not
just for choice but for innovation for
producing new options that are not
presented to us so passively yes I can
okay every day I walk to the University
died with us maybe you walk to the
University of Ray and you never see a
woman you find attractive whether that's
just physically or intellectually and of
their character right and yes there's a
level on which human beings are just
reacting by choices or a B and C so you
go to university you study chemistry in
your chemistry class there are only
three attractive women are you gonna try
to talk to this one this one of this one
that's not reality for us because I'm
not a puppet
I don't just passively react to cause
and effect I can sit there and think I
maybe I've never met a black woman maybe
I've lived my whole life in Guelph
Ontario and I've never met a black woman
and I think to myself wow you know what
in my mind the fantasy is that I
go to Africa and I meet this tall
dark-skinned black woman and we have
this romance and I go and pursue that
even though I've never seen that person
I've never reacted that stimulus right
a puppet cannot do this a computer
cannot do this and I'm not even choosing
something as far-fetched as creating an
original painting starting with a blank
canvas right there were hard empirically
testable criteria here that are not
subjective that are not appealing to a
spiritual or subjective sense of what it
means to be alive or make choices yeah I
think it's terrified well the thing is
if you are an atheist or someone who's
not religious who doesn't believe in a
that's a transcendent reality of
supernatural reality behind like beyond
material reality and this is still all
amounts to perceived choice and
perceived creative like thinking and
perceived choice but at the end of the
day it's all just material it's all just
matter yeah and married at the end of
the day is subject to the laws of
physics yeah the laws of physics
chemistry and how how would you what
what philosophical base would you base
on the argument that this perceived
choice and this perceived creative fact
those Pacific creative faculties of
humans are real or not just perceived
right Thanks how would you how would you
reconcile those both those those two
things that seem to contradict each
other like if you're making you say
nothing in the way you've proposed it
there you can already see your argument
is self-contradictory so you started by
establishing the criterion there's the
order you happen to present it in if it
is not transcendental then it cannot be
a choice so that's a completely
religious concept that has nothing to do
with my approach this problem
thank you so you started by saying only
something that transcends matter can be
a choice that's not my perspective my
perspective is you can be dissatisfied
with the women in your chemistry class
and think you're going to take a
vacation in Africa and try to find
romance in Avenue I'm sorry
no no wait there's
nothing transcendental there is no
reason who could possibly refute this
response by saying yes but that only
involves matter and not the
transcendence the transcendence of the
Material Plane
that's not we were discussing that's not
as if we're discussing the difference
between a puppet and a hand that holds a
puppet and a brain that controls the
hand that's all matter but there's a
difference there that really really
matters that's really significance and
that's really significant and that
so-called determinists wants to explain
away so you close by asking me the
question basically how do you justify
that the empirically obvious choice the
perceived choice but it's empirically
real it's perceived it's empirically
real how do you justify that it is real
okay this also implicitly admits the
weakness of the other side the other
side to determine us the onus is on you
because you're did trying to disprove
something that is empirically given that
is a parent that is perceived you have
to prove it's unreal okay so this isn't
the situation that we're standing in the
desert and somebody sees a mirage and
they say to you oh if you see a mirage
you have to prove to me there is really
water that this isn't an illusion this
is this Mirage in the desert right okay
no this is the opposite the onus is on
the other side the difference between
the puppet master and the puppet is
empirically real the difference between
things that can generate out of their
imagination original options and then
make those choices that can create new
options not just options are presented
with not just the three women you see
walking down the street or in your
chemistry class but can think of can
dream of a woman they've never met and
then go to Africa this is all this is
all in the world of the the empirically
real on things we experience and things
we can verify dreaming is empirically
real it's verifiable right but you want
to negate that so how do you explain
dreaming how do you explain to me that
the all of these examples I've given
that they don't exist that they are a
mirage and that in fact I in dream
and I am coming up with original ideas
of the future I am in fact a puppet
being controlled by something else
that's enormous burden of proof they
never even tried they never even attempt
to rise do they just engage in a kind of
satire of religious ideas like the idea
of transcendental super material agency
that are completely irrelevant to the
philosophical problem or a solution oh
you still haven't answered my question
how does it make sense everything is
matter and the interactions like if
everything is also matter and its
interactions how can we reconcile your
view with this philosophical
underpinning of atheism and materialism
it's still it's still like um I could
concede that that yeah what is your
definition of matter that something is
incapable of thought that's a--that's a
really stupid definition of Maverick
right I've who would define matter that
way the brain is made out of matter
yeah that's you're dreaming involves
matter yeah so why are you again you've
just defined I sorry I think I did
actually the beginning your that your
your definition of matter is of
something unthinking mine isn't but your
argument implies that that at some level
of complex organization matter just
magically and develops develops why
magic property what what that's all
three toys okay wait you you
characterize my position as magical with
no basis what's magical about dreaming
white why is it man what's magical about
planning a vacation in Africa it's
nothing magical there's nothing I
there's no burden of proof on me to
explain that this kind of thing happens
these are very mundane completely non
magical non transcendental circumstances
on the contrary it is magical it is
magical thinking if you tell me that the
puppet master the man holding the puppet
is himself a puppet with no evidence
where are the
strings who controls them what is the
cause of it oh no it's invisible it's
magical you have to use your imagination
you have you use your imagination that
there's a God controlling the strings oh
no wait we're atheist
it's a God with a lowercase G that we
call cause and effect that there is a
magical invisible supernal agency
choosing for him and determining these
choices even in his dreams even when he
thinks about the future there's a burden
of proof there you could never reach you
know you could never reach it you know
you can never have a material cause and
effect puppetmaster explanation for
human dreaming or human beings planning
and coming up with original ideas and
plans for things that you in the future
it's it's a burden of proof you could
never mean so your view do I know to
some extent it's not really his view to
some extent he's just engaging in debate
but the view of a determinist of someone
who believes in determinism is in fact
religion it's monotheism - God the role
of God has just been taken on by the
universe and by this abstract category
have caused an effect but there is no
evidence that there is no evidence to
support that the man holding the puppet
is himself a puppet being controlled by
another hand that was the role
Christians and Muslims believed was God
and you've just replaced it with an
abstract category of material cause and
effect the universe the laws of nature
well no we have really serious
empirically verifiable counterclaims
here that cannot be accounted for in
that way so so from my perspective the
determinist position is magical what's
magical thank you this is strange
because I'm aware of a lot of schools of
thought in Islamic theology for example
yes and where they defend see they are
likely they defend freewill based on the
annulment that okay the laws in physics
a lot of university material laws are
deterministic but right because God
created them God can also suspend him
whenever he wishes right and he can like
shield us from the deterministic
those balls and he can always in a
flavor so there's nothing deterministic
but if you if you're an atheist and yes
you only have those like you have matter
you here's an action you have these laws
of physics or chemistry it's it's right
it's kind of hard to make sense of them
on a theoretical basis like on a
conceptual with by the cat how could
even free will exist if they fight
acknowledge the the Oracle reality of
them what can make sense of them how so
there are two two allegories you're one
I have met many many people who used to
believe in Christianity or Islam but one
of these big mainstream religions and
then when they lose faith in
Christianity they also lose faith in
monogamy and sobriety and they think
okay now that I'm an atheist I'm going
to drink a lot of alcohol and have a lot
of sex or cheat on my wife have a lot of
sex with random people so this is a
stereotype but you know it exists and
that is because their belief in those
virtues was tied to their belief in this
God in this religious view of the world
right now for me I have always been an
atheist so my reasons for living by a
particular ethical code never relied on
that God right so for me a theism
doesn't have those those effects so I
think what you're describing I can
sympathize with that there are people
whose belief in God was linked to a
certain magical view of the universe and
then they assumed that by removing the
God they must don't even determinism and
they don't consider the extent to which
determinism is actually fallacious and
is repeating and we're trenching and
reinforcing a monotheistic way of
thinking with us secondly if you are
looking at a billiard table so in
American schools a pool billiards you
know there are balls on a table and they
are ruled by cause-and-effect right it
is very easy to look at that table and
say okay everything on this table is
cause-and-effect right like the
connection between the balls one ball
hits the other and the next one rules
there's no choice there's no original
thinking there's no
creativity is in a planning future
nothing about this resembles a human
being sitting at a blank canvas and
thinking what am I gonna draw a picture
of what am I gonna paint a picture of
painting of right and there's no
dreaming the balls don't dream they
don't have anxiety either and they don't
have fear they don't have hunger there
are a lot of differences between
billiard balls and human being all of
the material
all of them empirically verifiable
however the balls on the table can never
invent the game of pool they can never
invent billiards ultimately human beings
sat down and thought how can we make
this game fun and enjoyable there was
some other game before they were
inspired by and they adapted how are we
gonna set up the table and still today
like my daughter is only five years old
when we had a billiard table for her we
had to invent new games because she
didn't have the patience or interest to
play
okay let's come up with some new rules
let's come with a new what let's try to
make this fun right so all of us to some
extent this is the homo Luden's of
approaching human beings the role of
creativity in even creating a game and
even setting this up then the role of
human mind in planning and choosing
which hire thing this is not well
explained by the abstract god of cause
and effect it's not you're creating
absurdities and problems and what you're
demanding to know is is there something
magical about human beings creating this
game because it connects to choice
originality radical imagination by
radical imagination imagination that
departs from direct stimulus we are not
just reacting to something you see we've
thinking about the future or fantasizing
about having a better life in Africa
when you've never been to Africa you
know nobody suggested to you just think
of this yourself um
whether it's fantasy and daydreaming or
absolute dreaming
these are empirically real verifiable
aspects of life and in many ways they
create the condition
for the game of billiards for the very
limited sphere of experience that's
neatly described by cause-and-effect so
your view of the world presumes that the
ocean is cause and effect and then the
island is so to speak the illusion of
free will or choice original thinking
okay and my view is the opposite my view
is that the ocean is consciousness and
within that we have a small island where
we can observe empirical phenomena and
completely explain them in terms of
cause and effect which is only in like
laboratory conditions and a billiard
table in artificial conditions that we
as human beings have created this cause
and effect the idea is it's not all that
useful to us in a world of
hallucinations and dreams and wandering
around the jungle trying to find
something to eat and so on this is not
nearly so much of the human experience
there are people falling in love with
each other and falling in love each
other the kind of psychological
anthropological reality of what what
human life is like but sure we can sit
down and look at a chessboard or a
billiard table or these other very
artificial things and you want to
imagine that's how the whole world works
but that is really a deification of the
universe
that's a deification of the laws of
physics and saying the billiard ball
table controls me as the puppeteer and
I'm just the puppet in the hands of the
laws of cause and effect
well what why consider the subjective
subjective realm of existence as the
ocean you can't jump off a roof rooftop
and not expect gravity to pull you down
yeah and break your bones right right
but well you people can people do people
kill themselves all the time that way
right yeah they still like it yeah yes
right no no no wait wait no no no but
that's your example confirms why my
perspective is the way it is I could ask
the question I asked the same question
different wording why do some people
jump off rooftops expecting that they
can fly and then die and that is because
the subjective experience
is the ocean there's a famous example
from American history I'm sure it's part
legend and part real of children
watching the Superman cartoon I think
was actually the Superman radio show and
imagining they could fly like Superman
if they jumped out the window yeah yeah
and then they started this propaganda
campaign worth the start of every
Superman cartoon and movie and radio
show they'd have an announcement saying
look remember kids
Superman can fly but you can't they
really that safety warnings about this
they were I don't even know what we if
it happened or how many times have but
allegedly some children tried to fly and
that is because for them that's
subjective experience is more real and I
would again say something like the
experience of human beauty all these
things we perceive sure the subjective
experience blots out the objective
experience sure so for us that's the
ocean we swim it sure the key word is
here for right and that's not that's
we're talking about not reality
currently is not necessarily so if joy
but it but claims about reality this
comes to my first premise claims about
reality rest on contrasts in language so
if you say the puppet is unreal I didn't
say that I think the puppet is real say
the if you say the puppet is unreal
because the puppet is a fake person and
the puppet master the puppeteer the man
holding the puppet he is real he's a
real person that's a distinction of
reality now I know what you mean but in
a sense I disagree with you both are
real right one is a real puppet and one
is a real man but from another
perspective one is a fake man was Herman
what
is the contrast whereby you can claim
let alone prove that the man his choices
and his cognition and his dreams are
unreal there is a puppeteer that there
was another hand above it holding the
puppet controlling and determining what
happens here
what what what evidence is there for
that why would we imagine that every
other entity of that is composed of dead
matter behaves this way behaves
deterministically dude do dogs know I
mean everyday monkeys every
right but that's that's a pretty clear
difference isn't it why would a why
should we make an exception when it
comes to what what exception no no you
see you're creating the exact opposite
fallacy your fallacy is you are claiming
how can you why how dare you not treat
human beings as billiard balls but as if
billiard balls are the rule as you're
saying dead matter is the rule that
human being should live up to and I
could say to you no human beings fall
into the same category as dogs
empirically there's a lot of evidence
for that my whole view is empirically
verifiable do dogs dream they dream
right do billiard balls dream no do
computers dream no there are very simple
material worldly non-trans
transcendental criteria that separate
entities making decisions entities
engaging in creative imagination thought
about the future creating new ideas for
the future that creating options for the
future that didn't exist before and then
choosing those options or choosing other
options making those contrasts in their
minds billiard balls don't do that rocks
don't do that to some extent dogs
monkeys whales dolphins to some extent
other animals do there is nothing
mysterious about this the sense of
mystery is only created by holding up
completely spurious transcendental
contrasts why should a human being
aspire to outdo our rock in mindlessness
it's a totally bizarre claim that has no
again sorry you kept dodging my question
what empirical evidence can there be for
another puppeteer who is holding the
strings what is the cause and effect if
you keep saying in the abstract sense
there's cause defect kid the
relationship between the puppeteer and
the puppet there's cause and effect
there are strings where all my strings
who controls my dreams who or what what
is the cause and effect that determines
what I see when I dream okay so okay so
the laws of chemistry which give us okay
so so what so you would actually have to
rise the level of empirically trying to
validate trying to explain my dreams
explain my ideas for the future explain
the notion of taking a vacation in
Africa
it's almost dissatisfied with the option
in front of them and say no this man is
a billiard ball there's some cause for
this effect but you don't have them 11
within the laws of physics you have no
cause for that none there is no cause
for that effect there is no string so it
you're setting up criteria you can't
live up to yeah I I don't need to have
somebody who a man who is hoping to
publish like the laws of physics are
impersonal forces so is God so is God
right so is the Christian God so is the
Muslim God this will mean I don't have
to use like a court or a personal move
that's where you're wrong no it's it's
not sufficient to say because if we have
a ball in the billiard table that just
suddenly moves of itself where there's
no cause then we have so where did this
effect come from right you know why do
you so we we are we are talking where do
the dreams come from where do the ideas
of the future you you can't just say
over there there are causes there's an
unseen a magical transcendental mover
there's a cause you can't see and can't
imagine just just have faith just have
faith that the laws of physics and the
universe the God that we say isn't God
is explaining it no there's a burden of
proof on you here I mean we accept we
both accept billiard balls move around
the table the puppet moves in the puppet
master strings because of cause and
effect and now you're saying you want to
extend that to explain human imagination
creativity and original choice making so
where is the cause that if you are
claiming that's a cause-and-effect
relationship you the burden of proof is
on you to show a cause otherwise you're
engaging in magical religious
you're just asking me to have faith that
even though it's invisible it's not this
is blip that comes back to coal poppers
floss your science my mines planation
passes karl popper's tests everything
I'm proposing here is falsifiable
everything it's all empirically real
it's all perceptible it's all
falsifiable and part of coke poppers
test is it has to be true in some cases
and not others your philosophy and all
determinism thoroughgoing determinism is
non falsifiable is non-empirical is non
perceptible and you claim it's true in
all times in all cases whether or not it
can be verified or tested it sounds a
lot like religion by coal paupers
definition of philosophy science
determinism is a religion falsifiability
matters right well intuitively I can
find fault with you
well babe but I do find fault with yours
because your your argument absolutely
stands or falls on the notion that we
are dead matter that human beings must
be understood the same way as billiard
balls or the same way as rocks or the
puppet and mine is no it's very obvious
and again the Sciences have proven this
a dog is different from a billiard ball
that's part of why we're vegan as part
of the whole reason but a meal we think
cows are not the same as unliving inert
objects right
cows have perception and fear and dreams
and make choices very limited choices
cows do not get the idea to take a
vacation in Africa they don't I mean
many animals are limited to making
choice between what they see or thinking
about things they have seen in the past
their ability to come up with radically
new and original ideas is limited
I completely concede that animals are
less intelligent the human the other
non-human animals however you already
know there are a million scientific ways
to define and test it and falsify it
that animals are different from rocks I
mean what an ultimate unscientific point
of view that your philosophy insists
that there is no difference between
living and unliving
of course it is there's never been
signed up there has never been
scientific debate about whether rocks
are living around living and probably
from memory now III can do it what are
the criteria that separate living from
one living matter do you know the former
ones respiration reproduction response
to stimuli it's illicit of about six
evoke ability so they're there thing did
the the need to seek nourishment there
are a few there's something like six
official criteria right and we know
rocks often resemble something that's
alive in nature if you see certain cave
formations
you know stalagmites and stalactites it
looks like a blob it often looks it
looks like a jellyfish it looks like
something might be alive you can see
rock formations that look like they're
alive but they're not because they don't
respirate they don't breathe among other
things that's right they also don't
meant eight they don't of cognition
there's a whole list of empirically
verifiable properties matter and I I
sympathize I really do think your
perspective and the perspective of the
people who believe in determinism in my
audience because it's a belief it is a
belief in things unseen I really do
think you arrived at it through negging
the Christian worldview or the Muslim
world view and you don't realize the
extent to which you're reproducing the
defects of that worldview in a new
atheist worldview that thankfully at
least gives you an excuse to go out and
get drunk and sleep around alright guys
we're past the half hour mark this is
Mohammed aka Muhammad SAW disease he
supports me on patreon you should too
link in the description hit me up